GOLDEN 
QUESTIONNAIRE
2026
Data Engineering Interview Guide

🐍 Python
Covers data types, comprehensions, OOP, lambda functions, decorators, 
args/kwargs, generators, and more.
12
Questions

1. List vs Tuple vs Set vs Dictionary
Interview Answer: "List, Tuple, Set, and Dictionary are the four built-in collection data types in Python. Lists are mutable 
and ordered, whereas tuples are immutable and ordered. Sets store only unique elements and provide very fast 
membership testing, while dictionaries store data as key-value pairs for efficient lookups. In my projects, I use lists for 
collections of records, tuples for fixed values, sets for removing duplicates, and dictionaries for mapping or lookup 
operations."
2. What is List Comprehension and Dictionary 
Comprehension?
Interview Answer: "List comprehension and dictionary comprehension provide a concise way to create lists and 
dictionaries in a single line of code. They improve readability and are generally faster than traditional loops. List 
comprehension returns a list, while dictionary comprehension returns key-value pairs. I often use them for quick data 
transformations and filtering."
3. What is Inheritance and its types?
Interview Answer: "Inheritance is an OOP concept that allows one class to inherit properties and methods from another 
class, promoting code reusability. Python supports Single, Multiple, Multilevel, Hierarchical, and Hybrid inheritance. It 
helps reduce code duplication and makes applications easier to maintain. In real projects, I use inheritance to create 
specialized classes from common base classes."

4. What is a Lambda Function?
Interview Answer: "A lambda function is an anonymous, single-line function used for simple operations without defining a regular 
function. It is commonly used with functions like map(), filter(), and reduce(). Lambda functions make the code shorter and more 
readable for small transformations. I use them mainly for lightweight data processing tasks."
5. What are Decorators?
Interview Answer: "Decorators are functions that extend or modify the behavior of another function without changing its source code. 
They are implemented using the @ symbol. Decorators are commonly used for logging, authentication, caching, and execution time 
measurement. In data engineering projects, decorators are useful for logging ETL job execution."
6. What is Shallow Copy vs Deep Copy?
Interview Answer: "A shallow copy creates a new object but shares references to nested objects, so changes in nested elements affect 
both copies. A deep copy creates a completely independent copy of both the object and all nested objects. Python provides copy() for 
shallow copy and deepcopy() for deep copy. I use deep copy when working with nested data structures to avoid unintended 
modifications."

7. What are *args and **kwargs?
Interview Answer: "*args allows a function to accept any number of positional arguments, while **kwargs allows any number of keyword 
arguments. Internally, *args is stored as a tuple and **kwargs as a dictionary. They make functions flexible and reusable. I use them when 
the number of input parameters is unknown."
8. What is a Constructor? Explain init()
Interview Answer: "A constructor is a special method that is automatically called when an object is created. In Python, the constructor is 
the init() method. It is mainly used to initialize object attributes with default or user-provided values. This ensures every object starts with 
the required initial state."
9. What are Generators?
Interview Answer: "Generators are functions that produce values one at a time using the yield keyword instead of returning all values at 
once. They are memory efficient because they generate values only when needed. This makes them ideal for processing large files or 
streaming data. In data engineering, generators are useful for handling large datasets without consuming excessive memory."

10. What are the OOP Concepts?
Interview Answer: "The four main OOP concepts are Encapsulation, Abstraction, Inheritance, and Polymorphism. Encapsulation protects 
data by restricting direct access, abstraction hides implementation details, inheritance enables code reuse, and polymorphism allows 
the same interface to have multiple implementations. These principles make code modular, reusable, and maintainable."
11. What is Multi-threading vs Multi-processing?
Interview Answer: "Multithreading executes multiple threads within the same process and is best suited for I/O-bound tasks like API calls 
and file operations. Multiprocessing creates separate processes with independent memory and is ideal for CPU-intensive tasks. Unlike 
multithreading, multiprocessing is not limited by Python's GIL. I choose the approach based on the workload."
12. Do you know how Garbage Collection works in Python?
Interview Answer: "Yes. Python automatically manages memory using reference counting and a garbage collector. When an object's 
reference count becomes zero, its memory is released immediately. Python also detects and removes circular references using the gc 
module. This automatic memory management helps prevent memory leaks and improves application performance."

🐼 Pandas
Covers DataFrame vs Series, GroupBy, merge/join, loc vs iloc, handling nulls, 
apply functions, and Pandas vs PySpark.
7
Questions

1. What is a Pandas DataFrame vs a Series? What are the 
differences?
Interview Answer: "A Series is a one-dimensional data structure that stores a single column of data with an index, while a 
DataFrame is a two-dimensional table with rows and multiple columns. A DataFrame is essentially a collection of Series 
sharing the same index. In my projects, I mainly use DataFrames because ETL pipelines usually involve multiple columns 
and transformations."
2. How do you read different file formats in Pandas (CSV, 
JSON, Parquet, Excel)?
Interview Answer: "Pandas provides dedicated functions to read different file formats. I use read_csv() for CSV files, 
read_json() for JSON, read_parquet() for Parquet files, and read_excel() for Excel files. Depending on the source system, I 
choose the appropriate function and then perform data cleaning before further processing."
3. What is the difference between Merge, Join and Concat 
in Pandas?
Interview Answer: "Merge combines DataFrames based on common columns, similar to SQL joins. Join is mainly used to 
combine DataFrames using indexes. Concat simply appends DataFrames either row-wise or column-wise without 
matching keys. In ETL projects, I mostly use merge to combine customer or transaction datasets."

4. What is the difference between LOC vs ILOC?
Interview Answer: "loc accesses data using row and column labels, whereas iloc accesses data using integer positions. I 
use loc when filtering based on column names or indexes, and iloc when selecting rows by position. Both are useful 
during data validation and exploratory analysis."
5. How do you remove duplicate rows from a DataFrame?
Interview Answer: "I use the drop_duplicates() function to remove duplicate rows from a DataFrame. If needed, I specify 
particular columns using the subset parameter to identify duplicates. In ETL pipelines, removing duplicates is an 
important data quality step before loading data into the target system."
6. How to explode a nested JSON using Pandas?
Interview Answer: "For nested JSON data, I first flatten the JSON using json_normalize(). If a column contains a list of 
values, I use the explode() function to convert each list element into a separate row. This makes the data easier to 
transform and load into relational tables."
7. What is the difference between Pandas vs PySpark?
Interview Answer: "Pandas processes data on a single machine and is best for small to medium datasets that fit into 
memory. PySpark is built for distributed computing and can process large-scale data across multiple cluster nodes. In 
my projects, I use Pandas for local analysis and PySpark for big data ETL pipelines in production."

🗄 SQL
Covers normalization, window functions, joins, indexes, stored procedures, 
CTEs, keys, and query optimization.
12
Questions

1. What is Normalization and its types (1NF, 2NF, 3NF)? 
What are the advantages and disadvantages?
Interview Answer: "Normalization is the process of organizing data to reduce redundancy and improve data integrity. 
1NF removes repeating groups, 2NF removes partial dependency, and 3NF removes transitive dependency. The main 
advantage is reduced data duplication and better consistency, while the disadvantage is that too many joins can impact 
query performance."
2. What is De-normalization? When and why would you 
use it?
Interview Answer: "Denormalization is the process of combining tables to reduce joins and improve query performance. 
It introduces some data redundancy but makes data retrieval much faster. I mainly use it in reporting or data warehouse 
scenarios where read performance is more important than storage."
3. What are Window Functions in SQL? Give examples of 
ROW_NUMBER, RANK, DENSE_RANK, LAG, LEAD, SUM 
OVER.
Interview Answer: "Window functions perform calculations across a set of rows without grouping the data. 
ROW_NUMBER() gives unique row numbers, RANK() skips ranks after ties, DENSE_RANK() doesn't skip ranks, LAG() and 
LEAD() access previous and next rows, and SUM() OVER() calculates running totals. They're commonly used in analytics 
and reporting."

4. What are all the types of JOINs in SQL?
Interview Answer: "SQL supports INNER JOIN, LEFT JOIN, RIGHT JOIN, FULL OUTER JOIN, CROSS JOIN, and SELF JOIN. 
INNER JOIN returns matching records, LEFT and RIGHT return all records from one side, FULL returns all records from 
both tables, CROSS creates a Cartesian product, and SELF JOIN joins a table with itself."
5. What is a CTE (Common Table Expression)? Why do we 
use it? What are its advantages?
Interview Answer: "A CTE is a temporary result set created using the WITH clause. It improves query readability, simplifies 
complex SQL, and avoids repeating the same subquery multiple times. I often use CTEs for multi-step transformations 
and recursive queries."
6. What is Indexing in SQL? What are types of indexes 
(Clustered and Non-Clustered)?
Interview Answer: "An index improves query performance by allowing SQL to find data quickly instead of scanning the 
entire table. A Clustered Index stores data physically in sorted order, so only one can exist per table. A Non-Clustered 
Index stores pointers to the data and multiple indexes can be created on a table."

7. What is a Stored Procedure? How is it advantageous 
over normal querying?
Interview Answer: "A stored procedure is a precompiled collection of SQL statements stored in the database. It improves 
performance because the execution plan is reused and reduces network traffic. It also provides better security and 
makes complex business logic easier to maintain."
8. WHERE clause vs HAVING clause (4 differences)
Interview Answer: "WHERE filters individual rows before grouping, whereas HAVING filters grouped or aggregated data 
after GROUP BY. WHERE cannot use aggregate functions, but HAVING can. WHERE executes earlier than HAVING, 
making it generally faster."
9. What is the order of execution in SQL?
Interview Answer: "The logical execution order is FROM → WHERE → GROUP BY → HAVING → SELECT → ORDER BY. SQL 
first identifies the source table, filters rows, groups data, filters groups, selects required columns, and finally sorts the 
result. Understanding this order helps in writing optimized queries."

10. What is the difference between Primary Key, Foreign 
Key, Unique Key, and Composite Key?
Interview Answer: "A Primary Key uniquely identifies each row and cannot contain NULL values. A Foreign Key creates a 
relationship between two tables. A Unique Key also ensures uniqueness but allows one NULL value in most databases. A 
Composite Key is formed by combining two or more columns to uniquely identify a record."
11. What is DELETE vs DROP vs TRUNCATE? Is TRUNCATE 
DDL or DML?
Interview Answer: "DELETE removes selected rows and can be rolled back. TRUNCATE removes all rows quickly without 
logging individual row deletions and is a DDL command. DROP deletes the entire table structure along with its data. 
TRUNCATE is faster than DELETE because it deallocates data pages instead of deleting rows one by one."
12. What are the optimization techniques in SQL?
Interview Answer: "I optimize SQL queries by creating proper indexes, selecting only required columns instead of using 
SELECT *, filtering data early with the WHERE clause, and avoiding unnecessary subqueries or functions on indexed 
columns. I also analyze execution plans, use joins efficiently, and partition large tables when needed. These techniques 
improve query performance and reduce execution time."

⚡ PySpark
Covers Spark architecture, RDDs, lazy evaluation, transformations vs actions, cache vs persist, partitioning, skew, and salting.
12
Questions
1. Explain Spark Architecture in detail.
Interview Answer: "Spark follows a master-worker architecture. When a Spark job starts, the Driver creates the execution 
plan and coordinates the job. The Cluster Manager allocates resources, and Executors on worker nodes execute the tasks 
and store data in memory. This distributed architecture enables Spark to process large datasets efficiently."
2. What happens after a spark-submit?
Interview Answer: "After spark-submit, the Driver program starts and requests resources from the Cluster Manager. 
Executors are launched on worker nodes, and the Driver builds a DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) based on the 
transformations. When an action is triggered, Spark schedules tasks and executors process the data in parallel before 
returning the results."
3. RDD vs DataFrame vs Dataset (4 differences with 
examples)
Interview Answer: "RDD is the low-level distributed collection with full control but no optimization. DataFrame is a 
structured table with schema and uses the Catalyst Optimizer for better performance. Dataset combines DataFrame 
optimization with compile-time type safety, mainly in Scala and Java. In PySpark, I mostly use DataFrames because they 
are faster and easier to work with."

4. What is Lazy Evaluation in Spark? Why is it important?
Interview Answer: "Spark doesn't execute transformations immediately. Instead, it records them in a DAG and executes 
only when an action like show(), count(), or collect() is called. This is called Lazy Evaluation. It helps Spark optimize 
execution, reduce unnecessary computations, and improve overall performance."
5. Narrow Transformation vs Wide Transformation (4 
differences with examples)
Interview Answer: "Narrow transformations process data within the same partition and don't require data movement, 
such as map(), filter(), and flatMap(). Wide transformations require shuffling data across partitions, such as groupBy(), 
join(), and reduceByKey(). Narrow transformations are faster because they avoid network communication."
6. What is a Sort-Merge Join vs Shuffle-Hash Join?
Interview Answer: "Sort-Merge Join first shuffles and sorts both datasets before joining them. It's best for large datasets 
and is Spark's default join strategy. Shuffle-Hash Join also shuffles data but builds a hash table on the smaller side 
instead of sorting. It is faster when one dataset is significantly smaller."

7. Cache vs Persist (4 differences and when to use each)
Interview Answer: "Both cache() and persist() store data for reuse. cache() stores data only in memory using the default 
storage level. persist() allows different storage options such as memory, disk, or both. I use cache() for frequently 
accessed small datasets and persist() when the dataset is too large to fit entirely in memory."
8. Repartition vs Coalesce (4 differences and when to use 
each)
Interview Answer: "Repartition() increases or decreases partitions and performs a full shuffle, making it suitable for 
balancing data before joins. Coalesce() mainly reduces partitions without a full shuffle, making it faster. I use repartition() 
for better parallelism and coalesce() before writing output files to reduce the number of files."
9. What is Data Skewness? What causes it and how do 
you handle it?
Interview Answer: "Data skewness occurs when a few partitions contain much more data than others, causing some 
executors to take longer. It is usually caused by uneven key distribution during joins or aggregations. I handle it using 
techniques like salting, broadcast joins, repartitioning, or filtering skewed data."

10. What is Salting? Why and how do you implement it in 
Spark? Provide code example.
Interview Answer: "Salting is a technique used to handle data skew by adding a random value to skewed keys, 
distributing records across multiple partitions. This prevents one executor from processing all records for the same key 
and improves join performance."
Example:
from pyspark.sql.functions import concat, lit, rand, floor
df1 = df1.withColumn(
    "salted_key",
    concat(df1.id, lit("_"), floor(rand()*5))
)
11. What are the optimization techniques to improve Spark 
performance?
Interview Answer: "I improve Spark performance by using partitioning, broadcast joins, caching, avoiding unnecessary 
shuffle operations, selecting only required columns, and using efficient file formats like Parquet. I also tune executor 
memory, optimize partition sizes, and monitor jobs using the Spark UI."
12. What is Broadcast Join vs Salting?
Interview Answer: "Broadcast Join is used when one table is small. Spark sends the small table to all executors, avoiding 
expensive shuffles. Salting is used to solve data skew by distributing heavily repeated keys across multiple partitions. I 
use broadcast for small lookup tables and salting when joins are slowed down by skewed data."

☁ AWS
Covers S3, Glue, Lambda, Redshift, DMS, Kinesis, IAM, Data Warehouse vs Data 
Lake, CI/CD, and more.
17
Questions

1. What is Amazon S3? What are the different S3 Storage 
Classes?
Interview Answer: "Amazon S3 is an object storage service used to store large amounts of structured and unstructured 
data with high durability and scalability. Common storage classes include Standard, Intelligent-Tiering, Standard-IA, One 
Zone-IA, Glacier Instant Retrieval, Glacier Flexible Retrieval, and Glacier Deep Archive. I typically store raw and processed 
data in S3 for ETL pipelines."
2. What is AWS Glue? What are the components and key 
features of it?
Interview Answer: "AWS Glue is a serverless ETL service used to discover, transform, and load data. Its main components 
are the Data Catalog, Crawler, ETL Jobs, Triggers, Workflows, and Job Bookmarks. Key features include automatic 
schema discovery, serverless execution, Spark-based processing, and easy integration with S3, Redshift, and Athena."
3. What are AWS Glue Dynamic Frames? How do they 
differ from Spark DataFrames?
Interview Answer: "Dynamic Frames are AWS Glue's data structure designed for semi-structured and inconsistent data. 
Unlike Spark DataFrames, they can automatically handle schema variations and missing fields without failing. When I 
need Spark SQL functions or better performance, I convert Dynamic Frames into DataFrames."

4. What is the difference between Data Warehouse vs 
Data Lake vs Data Lakehouse?
Interview Answer: "A Data Warehouse stores structured, curated data for reporting and BI. A Data Lake stores raw 
structured and unstructured data at low cost. A Data Lakehouse combines the flexibility of a data lake with the reliability 
and ACID capabilities of a data warehouse, making it suitable for both analytics and machine learning."
5. What are Glue Job Bookmarks? How do they enable 
incremental loads?
Interview Answer: "Glue Job Bookmarks track the data that has already been processed in previous job runs. During the 
next execution, Glue processes only new or modified records instead of the entire dataset. This enables efficient 
incremental loading, reduces processing time, and lowers costs."
6. What is the difference between Glue vs EMR vs 
Lambda? When do you use each?
Interview Answer: "Glue is a serverless ETL service for data integration. EMR is a managed Hadoop and Spark cluster 
used for large-scale big data processing with more control. Lambda is a serverless compute service for short event-
driven tasks. I use Glue for ETL, EMR for complex Spark workloads, and Lambda for automation and event-based 
processing."

7. How do you deploy your Glue code to higher 
environments (CI/CD)?
Interview Answer: "In my projects, Glue scripts are stored in Git for version control. A CI/CD pipeline using services like 
CodePipeline, CodeBuild, or Jenkins validates and deploys the code to Dev, QA, and Production environments. 
Configuration values such as bucket names and IAM roles are managed separately to avoid code changes."
8. What is AWS Lambda? What are its key features? What 
are its limitations?
Interview Answer: "AWS Lambda is a serverless compute service that runs code in response to events without managing 
servers. Key features include automatic scaling, event-driven execution, and pay-per-use pricing. Its limitations include a 
maximum execution time of 15 minutes, deployment package size limits, memory limits, and concurrency limits."
9. What are the advantages of Athena?
Interview Answer: "Amazon Athena is a serverless query service that allows SQL queries directly on data stored in S3. It 
requires no infrastructure management, integrates with the Glue Data Catalog, supports multiple file formats like 
Parquet and ORC, and charges only for the amount of data scanned. It is ideal for ad hoc analytics."

10. Explain the architecture of Amazon Redshift.
Interview Answer: "Amazon Redshift follows a Massively Parallel Processing (MPP) architecture. It consists of a Leader Node, which 
receives SQL queries and creates execution plans, and multiple Compute Nodes, which process data in parallel. Data is stored in a 
columnar format, enabling high-performance analytical queries."
11. Difference between Athena vs Redshift vs Redshift Spectrum.
Interview Answer: "Athena queries data directly from S3 without storing it. Redshift is a fully managed data warehouse optimized for 
high-performance analytics on stored data. Redshift Spectrum allows Redshift to query external data stored in S3 without loading it into 
Redshift. I use Athena for ad hoc queries, Redshift for BI dashboards, and Spectrum for combining warehouse and data lake data."
12. How do you optimize Athena query performance?
Interview Answer: "I optimize Athena by storing data in Parquet or ORC format, partitioning large datasets, compressing files, selecting 
only required columns instead of SELECT *, and avoiding scanning unnecessary partitions. These techniques reduce the amount of data 
scanned, improve query performance, and lower query costs."

13. What are the distribution styles in Redshift? What is 
the syntax for Distribution Key?
Interview Answer: "Redshift supports AUTO, EVEN, KEY, and ALL distribution styles. EVEN distributes rows equally, KEY 
distributes rows based on a selected column, ALL copies small tables to every node, and AUTO lets Redshift choose the 
best option. I usually use DISTKEY on frequently joined columns to reduce data movement."
Syntax:
CREATE TABLE employee (
    emp_id INT,
    dept_id INT,
    name VARCHAR(50)
) DISTSTYLE KEY DISTKEY(dept_id);
14. Dist Key vs Sort Key in Redshift (4 differences)
Interview Answer: "Dist Key determines how data is distributed across compute nodes, while Sort Key determines how 
data is physically sorted within each node. Dist Key improves join performance by minimizing data movement, whereas 
Sort Key improves query performance by reducing data scanned. I use Dist Key on join columns and Sort Key on 
frequently filtered columns like dates."
15. What is Amazon CloudWatch? What is it used for?
Interview Answer: "Amazon CloudWatch is a monitoring service for AWS resources and applications. It collects metrics, 
logs, and events, allowing us to monitor system health and performance. I use CloudWatch to monitor Glue jobs, 
Lambda executions, EC2 instances, and to create alarms for job failures or high resource usage."

16. What is AWS DMS (Database Migration Service)? How 
does it capture updates using CDC?
Interview Answer: "AWS DMS is a managed service used to migrate data between databases with minimal downtime. It 
supports both full data load and Change Data Capture (CDC). CDC continuously reads database transaction logs to 
capture inserts, updates, and deletes, and replicates only those changes to the target database."
17. What are SCD Types? Explain SCD Type 2 with an 
example.
Interview Answer: "Slowly Changing Dimensions (SCD) are techniques used to manage changes in dimension data. 
Common types are Type 1, Type 2, and Type 3. SCD Type 2 preserves history by creating a new record whenever a value 
changes, while marking the old record as inactive using effective dates or an active flag."
Example:
Before Update
Customer_ID City Start_Date End_Date Active
101 Delhi 2024-01-01 NULL Y
After Update
Customer_ID City Start_Date End_Date Active
101 Delhi 2024-01-01 2025-06-30 N
101 Mumbai 2025-07-01 NULL Y
Interview Closing Line: "In one of my ETL projects, I implemented SCD Type 2 using PySpark by checking changed 
records, expiring the old record with an end date, and inserting a new active record. This helped maintain complete 
historical customer information for reporting and auditing."

🌀 Airflow
Covers DAGs, operators, task dependencies, scheduling, retries, and pipeline 
orchestration best practices.
6
Questions

1. What is a DAG in Apache Airflow? How does it work?
Interview Answer: "A DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) is a workflow that defines the sequence of tasks in Apache Airflow. 
Each task represents a step in the pipeline, and dependencies decide the execution order. Airflow schedules the DAG, 
executes the tasks, and monitors their status. I use DAGs to automate ETL pipelines."
2. What is XCom (Cross-Communication) in Airflow? How 
do you use xcom_push and xcom_pull?
Interview Answer: "XCom (Cross-Communication) is used to share small amounts of data between Airflow tasks. 
xcom_push() stores a value from one task, and xcom_pull() retrieves that value in another task. I use XCom to pass file 
names, IDs, or status information between tasks."
Example:
# Task 1
ti.xcom_push(key="file_name", value="sales.csv")
# Task 2
file = ti.xcom_pull(key="file_name")
3. What are the different ways to trigger a DAG in Airflow?
Interview Answer: "A DAG can be triggered in multiple ways. It can run on a schedule using cron expressions, be 
triggered manually from the Airflow UI, through the Airflow CLI, using the REST API, or by another DAG using 
TriggerDagRunOperator. The method depends on the project requirement."

4. How does Airflow handle task retries?
Interview Answer: "If a task fails, Airflow can retry it automatically based on the retry configuration. We define the 
number of retries and the retry delay in the DAG. If the task still fails after all retries, it is marked as failed and alerts can 
be sent."
5. Difference between Airflow vs Step Functions
Interview Answer: "Apache Airflow is mainly used for scheduling and orchestrating ETL and data pipelines. AWS Step 
Functions are used to coordinate AWS services like Lambda, Glue, and ECS in serverless workflows. I use Airflow for 
complex data workflows and Step Functions for AWS event-driven applications."
6. How do you define dependencies in Airflow DAGs?
Interview Answer: "Dependencies define the order in which tasks run. In Airflow, I use >> or << operators, or methods like 
set_upstream() and set_downstream(). This ensures that one task starts only after the previous task completes 
successfully."
Example:
task1 >> task2 >> task3
or
task2.set_upstream(task1)
task2.set_downstream(task3)
Interview Closing Line: "In my ETL project, I defined dependencies so that data extraction completed first, then 
transformation ran, and finally the processed data was loaded into the target system."

🔷 Azure
Covers Azure Data Factory, Databricks, Delta Lake, Unity Catalog, managed vs 
external tables, PII security, and more.
10
Questions

1. Why did you use Azure Data Factory (ADF) in the project?
Interview Answer: "We used Azure Data Factory to automate and orchestrate our ETL pipeline. It helped us move data from different 
source systems to Azure Data Lake and Databricks. ADF also handled scheduling, monitoring, and error handling, reducing manual 
effort."
2. How did you implement incremental loading in ADF?
Interview Answer: "We implemented incremental loading using a Watermark column such as Last_Updated_Date. During each pipeline 
run, ADF loaded only the new or updated records instead of the entire dataset. This reduced processing time and improved 
performance."
3. Which ADF activities were used?
Interview Answer: "In my project, I used Copy Data Activity to move data, Lookup Activity to read configuration values, ForEach Activity to 
process multiple files, If Condition for validations, Stored Procedure Activity for database operations, and Execute Pipeline to call another 
pipeline."

4. What is Unity Catalog?
Interview Answer: "Unity Catalog is Databricks' centralized data governance solution. It helps manage tables, files, permissions, and data 
access from one place. It provides fine-grained security, auditing, and easy data sharing across teams."
5. What is Liquid Clustering?
Interview Answer: "Liquid Clustering is a Databricks feature that automatically organizes data without manually repartitioning it. It 
improves query performance by reducing the amount of data scanned. It is more flexible than traditional partitioning because data can 
be reorganized automatically."
6. What is Delta Lake? What are its features?
Interview Answer: "Delta Lake is an open-source storage layer built on top of a data lake. It provides ACID transactions, schema 
enforcement, schema evolution, time travel, and data versioning. These features make data more reliable and suitable for ETL pipelines."

7. What is the difference between Managed Tables and 
External Tables?
Interview Answer: "Managed Tables store both data and metadata inside Databricks. If the table is deleted, the data is 
also deleted. External Tables store only the metadata in Databricks, while the actual data remains in external storage like 
ADLS or S3. Deleting the table does not delete the data."
8. How does Azure Key Vault help?
Interview Answer: "Azure Key Vault securely stores secrets such as passwords, API keys, and connection strings. Instead 
of hardcoding credentials in the code, applications retrieve them securely from Key Vault. This improves security and 
simplifies secret management."
9. What is Databricks and what is the Architecture of 
Databricks?
Interview Answer: "Azure Databricks is a cloud-based platform for big data processing and machine learning using 
Apache Spark. Its architecture includes a Control Plane, which manages clusters and notebooks, and a Data Plane, 
where Spark clusters process the data. This architecture provides scalability, performance, and easy collaboration."

10. How do you secure PII data?
Interview Answer: "I secure PII data by masking or encrypting sensitive columns such as names, email IDs, and phone numbers. I use 
role-based access control so only authorized users can view the data. I also store secrets in Azure Key Vault and enable encryption for 
data at rest and in transit."

🧩 Scenario-Based Questions
33
Questions
Real-world data engineering problems covering pipelines, failures, 
performance, schema evolution, SCD, API ingestion, PII, and more.

1. You are ingesting daily sales data into S3. One day, the 
pipeline ingests duplicate records. How will you detect 
and handle this duplication?
Interview Answer: "In this situation, I would first identify duplicate records using the primary key or a combination of 
business keys. In Spark, I would use dropDuplicates() to remove duplicates before loading the data. I would also check 
the source to understand why duplicates were generated. Finally, I would add data quality checks so duplicates are 
detected automatically in future pipeline runs."
2. A Glue job that usually runs in 10 minutes is now taking 
1 hour. How do you debug and optimize it?
Interview Answer: "First, I would check the Glue job logs in CloudWatch to identify the bottleneck. Then, I would check 
for data skew, unnecessary shuffles, or an increase in input data size. I would optimize the job using partitioning, caching 
if needed, and converting files to Parquet. Finally, I would monitor the job again to verify the improvement."
3. Your Spark job is failing with an Out Of Memory (OOM) 
error on the executor nodes. What steps will you take to 
resolve it?
Interview Answer: "I would first check the Spark UI to identify which stage is causing the memory issue. Then, I would 
avoid collect() on large datasets, increase executor memory if required, reduce data shuffling, and repartition the data 
properly. If the issue is caused by data skew, I would use salting or broadcast joins."

4. You are asked to implement schema evolution in your 
pipeline. Yesterday the source added a new column, 
breaking your ETL job. How will you handle it in Glue or 
Spark?
Interview Answer: "I would enable schema evolution so the pipeline can handle new columns automatically. In AWS 
Glue, I would update the Glue Crawler or Data Catalog. In Spark, I would use schema merging while reading the data. 
This ensures the pipeline continues to run even when new columns are added."
5. You are migrating a SQL-based on-prem data 
warehouse to AWS Redshift. What are the key factors you 
will consider to ensure performance and cost efficiency?
Interview Answer: "I would choose the correct Distribution Key and Sort Key, use column compression, and load data in 
bulk using S3. I would also convert frequently used queries into optimized SQL and monitor query performance. This 
improves both performance and reduces storage and compute costs."
6. Your Redshift query is running for hours without 
finishing. How do you debug and optimize it?
Interview Answer: "I would first check the Redshift query plan and system tables to identify the slow operation. Then, I 
would verify the Distribution Key and Sort Key, create or update statistics using ANALYZE, and remove unnecessary joins. 
I would also rewrite the query if required to improve performance."

7. An Airflow DAG failed in production due to a missing 
connection configuration. How will you troubleshoot and 
fix the issue?
Interview Answer: "I would first check the Airflow logs to identify the missing connection. Then, I would verify the 
connection details in the Airflow UI under Admin → Connections. After updating the correct credentials, I would test the 
connection and rerun the failed task. Finally, I would document the configuration to avoid similar issues."
8. Your data pipeline has upstream dependencies (3 
sources). One source failed, but the pipeline still ingested 
incomplete data. How will you implement data quality 
checks?
Interview Answer: "I would add validation checks before starting the ETL process. The pipeline should verify that all three 
source files are available and complete. If any source is missing, the pipeline should stop, send an alert, and avoid 
loading incomplete data. This ensures data accuracy."
9. A client requests near-real-time dashboards, but your 
system only supports batch processing. How will you 
redesign the pipeline to support near real-time analytics?
Interview Answer: "I would redesign the pipeline using streaming technologies such as Kafka, Spark Structured 
Streaming, or AWS Kinesis. Incoming data would be processed continuously and stored in the target system. This would 
allow dashboards to refresh every few seconds or minutes instead of waiting for batch jobs."

10. Your data is landing in S3 as CSV files, but analysts are 
complaining about query performance in Athena. How 
would you improve performance without changing the 
source system?
Interview Answer: "I would convert the CSV files into Parquet format using AWS Glue because Parquet is columnar and 
much faster for Athena queries. I would also partition the data based on columns like date or region and compress the 
files. This reduces the amount of data scanned, improving both query performance and cost."
11. In a PySpark job, you notice data skew where one key 
has 90% of the records. How would you handle this issue?
Interview Answer: "I would first identify the skewed key using the Spark UI or by checking the data distribution. Then, I 
would use salting to split the heavy key into multiple partitions or use a broadcast join if one table is small. This helps 
distribute the data evenly and improves job performance."
12. You are handling GDPR-compliant data. How will you 
ensure PII data masking and encryption in your ETL 
pipeline?
Interview Answer: "I would identify all PII columns such as name, email, and phone number. Sensitive data would be 
masked or encrypted before storing it. I would also use IAM roles and encryption for S3 to ensure only authorized users 
can access the data."

13. You are asked to design an SCD Type 2 pipeline in Glue. 
How will you track history while keeping query 
performance acceptable?
Interview Answer: "I would compare the source and target data to identify changed records. The old record would be 
marked as inactive, and a new record would be inserted with the updated information. I would store the data in Parquet 
format and partition it to improve query performance."
14. Your batch ETL pipeline has strict SLAs (must finish 
before 8 AM daily). What steps will you take to ensure 
timely completion even when data volume doubles?
Interview Answer: "I would optimize Spark jobs by reducing shuffles, using partitioning, and processing only incremental 
data instead of the full dataset. I would also monitor job performance and increase cluster resources if needed. This 
helps the pipeline finish within the SLA."
15. During a production release, your Spark job failed 
because of missing Python packages. How would you 
package and deploy external dependencies reliably in 
Glue/Lambda/Spark?
Interview Answer: "I would package all required Python libraries before deployment and include them with the Glue job 
or Lambda function. I would test the deployment in the development environment before releasing it to production. 
This ensures all dependencies are available during execution."

16. You are asked to integrate third-party API data into 
your S3 data lake. How will you handle API throttling, 
retries, and incremental loads?
Interview Answer: "I would implement retry logic with delays if the API limit is reached. I would load only new or updated 
records using timestamps or IDs instead of fetching all data every time. This reduces API calls and improves pipeline 
performance."
17. A downstream analytics team reports inconsistent 
results from the same dataset at different times of the 
day. How do you debug and ensure data consistency?
Interview Answer: "I would first verify whether the ETL pipeline completed successfully. Then, I would compare the 
source and target data, check for partial loads, and validate row counts. Finally, I would add data quality checks and 
alerts to ensure only complete data is available for reporting."
18. Your team wants to move from a monolithic ETL 
pipeline to modular micro-ETL jobs. What benefits will 
this provide, and how would you implement it?
Interview Answer: "I would divide the large pipeline into smaller independent ETL jobs. This makes the pipeline easier to 
maintain, test, and troubleshoot. Each job can run separately, making deployments faster and failures easier to isolate."

19. A data scientist asks you to provide training data from 
multiple sources (structured + unstructured). How do you 
design a pipeline to ensure clean, joined, and high-quality 
data?
Interview Answer: "I would collect data from all sources, clean and validate it, remove duplicates, and standardize the 
format. Then, I would join the datasets using common keys and perform data quality checks before storing the final 
dataset in the data lake."
20. Your data pipeline is built on AWS services. A region-
wide outage occurs. How will you design for fault 
tolerance and high availability?
Interview Answer: "I would store backup data in another AWS region using cross-region replication. I would enable 
automated backups and design the pipeline to fail over to the secondary region if the primary region becomes 
unavailable. This ensures business continuity with minimum downtime."
21. The business team requests near real-time alerts when 
fraud transactions are detected. How would you 
implement this on AWS?
Interview Answer: "I would use Amazon Kinesis to capture streaming data, process it using AWS Lambda or Spark 
Streaming, and apply fraud detection rules. If a suspicious transaction is found, I would send an alert using Amazon SNS 
or email. This provides near real-time notifications."

22. Every day we load data and the job is scheduled, but 
today it failed. Data will not be loaded. What do you do?
Interview Answer: "First, I would check the job logs in CloudWatch or Airflow to find the root cause. After fixing the issue, 
I would rerun only the failed job instead of the entire pipeline. Then, I would validate the loaded data and notify the 
stakeholders once the job is completed."
23. You have TABLE1 (0, 1, 1, 2, 3, NULL) and TABLE2 (1, 2, 3, 
NULL, NULL). Give the output of Cross Join, Left Outer 
Join, Right Outer Join, Full Outer Join.
Interview Answer:
Cross Join: Every row of TABLE1 joins with every row of TABLE2 (6 × 5 = 30 rows).
Left Join: Returns all rows from TABLE1 and matching rows from TABLE2. Unmatched rows show NULL.
Right Join: Returns all rows from TABLE2 and matching rows from TABLE1.
Full Outer Join: Returns all matching and non-matching rows from both tables.
24. If you have a pipeline that has completed 40% of the 
job but then fails, how do you ensure the rest 60% 
completes without re-executing the first 40%?
Interview Answer: "I would use checkpointing or incremental processing. The pipeline stores the last successfully 
processed record or batch. After fixing the issue, it resumes from that point instead of starting from the beginning. This 
saves both time and compute cost."

25. You are processing large files without using Spark. 
How do you approach this?
Interview Answer: "I would process the file in smaller chunks instead of loading the entire file into memory. Depending 
on the requirement, I would use Python generators, Pandas chunk processing, or batch processing. This prevents 
memory issues and improves performance."
26. You have 100 stores connected via API and want data 
from all stores every 10 minutes with exception handling. 
How do you design this?
Interview Answer: "I would schedule the API calls using Airflow or Lambda. Each store would have its own task with retry 
logic and error handling. Failed API calls would be logged and retried without affecting the successful stores. Finally, all 
data would be stored in S3."
27. Keeping a KPI in mind, explain how you are extracting, 
cleaning, and loading data.
Interview Answer: "I first extract data from the source system or API. Then I clean the data by removing duplicates, 
handling missing values, and validating business rules. Finally, I load the cleaned data into Redshift or S3, ensuring the 
KPI calculations are accurate."

28. How do you restrict duplicate records from passing 
downstream in your pipeline?
Interview Answer: "I remove duplicate records using business keys or primary keys before loading the data. In Spark, I 
use dropDuplicates() and perform data quality checks. This ensures only unique records are sent to downstream 
systems."
29. You have a new client with different data vendors and 
15 key metrics that change weekly or monthly. How would 
you set up an ETL pipeline?
Interview Answer: "I would create separate ingestion jobs for each vendor and store the raw data in S3. Then I would 
build transformation jobs to standardize the data and calculate the required metrics. Airflow would schedule the jobs, 
and the final data would be loaded into Redshift for reporting."
30. Design a pipeline for an e-commerce application. 
What tables and columns do you need?
Interview Answer: "I would create tables such as Customers, Products, Orders, Order_Items, Payments, and Shipments. 
Important columns include Customer_ID, Product_ID, Order_ID, Quantity, Price, Payment_Status, Order_Date, and 
Delivery_Status. The pipeline extracts data, cleans it, and loads it into the data warehouse for analytics."

31. It takes 36 hours in Elasticsearch for Oracle data to be 
ingested and processed. How do you optimize this?
Interview Answer: "I would use incremental loading instead of full loading, process data in parallel, optimize batch size, 
and reduce unnecessary transformations. I would also monitor the pipeline to identify bottlenecks and tune resources. 
This helps reduce the processing time significantly."
32. What production issue did you face?
Interview Answer: "One production issue I faced was duplicate records being loaded because the source system resent 
the same file. I identified the issue using row count validation and removed duplicates using business keys before 
loading the data. I also added duplicate validation checks to prevent the issue in future runs."
33. What was the SLA of your project?
Interview Answer: "Our project SLA was that the complete ETL pipeline had to finish before 8:00 AM every day so that 
business users could access fresh reports. We continuously monitored the pipeline, optimized Spark jobs, and 
configured alerts to ensure the SLA was always met."

Git & GitHub 
Interview Questions
Covers Git basics, branching, merging, pull requests, Git workflow, common 
commands, merge conflicts, git fetch vs pull, and real-world scenarios.
12 Questions

1. How did you use Git in your project?
Interview Answer:
"In my project, we used Git for version control. Every developer worked on a separate branch, committed their changes locally, and 
pushed them to GitHub. After code review through a Pull Request, the changes were merged into the main branch. This helped us 
collaborate without affecting the production code."

2. What is the Git workflow followed in your 
project?
Interview Answer:
"Our workflow was: Clone the repository ³ Create a feature branch ³ Make code changes ³ Commit the changes ³ Push 
to GitHub ³ Create a Pull Request ³ Code Review ³ Merge into the main branch ³ Deploy the application."
Clone
Copy the repository
locally
Feature Branch
Create a branch for
work
Code & Commit
Make changes and
commit
Push & PR
Push, open pull
request

3. What happens when you 
run git push?
Interview Answer:
"git push uploads all committed changes from the local repository to the 
remote GitHub repository. It allows other team members to access the latest 
code. Usually, after pushing the code, we create a Pull Request for review 
before merging."

4. Why do we create branches in Git?
Interview Answer:
"We create branches to develop new features or fix bugs without affecting the main code. Every developer works on 
their own branch. Once the work is completed and reviewed, it is merged into the main branch."

5. What is a Pull Request (PR)?
Interview Answer:
"A Pull Request is a request to merge code from one branch into another. It 
allows team members to review the code, suggest changes, and approve it 
before merging. This helps maintain code quality and avoid production issues."

6. What is a Merge Conflict? How did you 
resolve it?
Interview Answer:
"A merge conflict occurs when two developers modify the same part of the same file. Git cannot decide which change to 
keep automatically. I resolved it by reviewing both changes, keeping the correct code, testing it, and then committing 
the resolved version."
Commit 
ResolvedTest Code
Keep 
Correct 
Code
Review 
Changes

7. What Git commands do you use most often?
Interview Answer:
"In my daily work, I mostly use git clone, git status, git add, git commit, git pull, git push, git branch, git checkout, and git merge. These 
commands are enough for most day-to-day development tasks."
git clone git status git add
git commit git pull git push
git branch git checkout git merge

8. What will you do if your 
local branch is behind the 
remote branch?
Interview Answer:
"First, I would run git pull to fetch the latest changes from the remote 
repository. If there are any conflicts, I would resolve them, test the code, and 
then push my updated changes back to GitHub."

9. How do you check which files have changed 
before committing?
Interview Answer:
"I use the git status command to check modified, staged, and untracked files. If I want to see the exact code changes, I use git diff before 
committing."
git status
Check modified, staged, and untracked files
git diff
See the exact code changes before committing

10. What production issue did you face while using 
Git?
Interview Answer:
"One issue I faced was a merge conflict when two developers modified the same file. We resolved the conflict by reviewing both 
changes, testing the final code, and then merging it. After that, we informed the team to pull the latest code before making further 
changes."

11. What is the difference between git fetch and git 
pull?
Interview Answer:
"git fetch only downloads the latest changes from the remote repository but does not merge them. git pull downloads the changes and 
automatically merges them into the current branch. I usually use git pull to keep my branch updated."
git fetch
Downloads the latest changes from the remote repository but 
does not merge them
git pull
Downloads the changes and automatically merges them into 
the current branch

12. Suppose you accidentally 
committed a wrong file. What 
will you do?
Interview Answer:
"If the commit is only in my local repository, I can undo it and recommit the 
correct files. If it has already been pushed, I would use Git commands like git 
revert or create a new commit to fix the mistake, depending on the team's 
process."
These questions closely match the Git topics covered in your PDF (workflow, 
commands, branching, merging, tracking, and merge conflicts) and are well 
suited for Data Engineer interviews.

CI/CD Pipeline Interview Q&A
Covers CI/CD pipelines, Pull Requests, environment management, unit testing, 
secrets management, Infrastructure as Code, deployment strategies, approval 
gates, monitoring, and more.
12
Questions

Q1: What happens when a developer raises a Pull 
Request?
"When a developer raises a Pull Request, the CI pipeline is triggered automatically. It runs code quality checks, unit tests, SQL validation, 
PySpark tests, and Airflow DAG validation. If all tests pass and the PR is approved, the code is merged into the main branch and 
becomes ready for deployment."

Q2: Why do we use separate Dev, QA, and 
Production environments?
"Separate environments help us test code safely before releasing it to users. Developers make changes in Dev, testers validate them in 
QA, and only approved code is deployed to Production. This reduces the risk of production failures and improves software quality."

Q3: What happens if unit tests fail during CI?
"If unit tests fail, the CI pipeline stops immediately and the code is not deployed further. The developer checks the test logs, fixes the 
issue, and pushes the updated code. The pipeline is then triggered again until all tests pass."

Q4: Why should secrets never be stored in Git?
"Secrets such as passwords, API keys, and database credentials should never be stored in Git because they can be exposed to 
unauthorized users. Instead, we use AWS Secrets Manager, Parameter Store, or Azure Key Vault to securely manage sensitive 
information."

Q5: What is the benefit of Infrastructure as Code 
(IaC)?
"Infrastructure as Code allows us to create and manage cloud resources using code instead of manually creating them. Tools like 
Terraform and AWS CDK help automate infrastructure deployment. This provides consistency, version control, and faster deployments."

Q6: How do you deploy the same code to multiple 
environments?
"We use the same application code across all environments and change only the configuration values. Parameters such as S3 buckets, 
database names, IAM roles, and secrets are stored separately for Dev, QA, and Production. This makes deployments safer and easier to 
maintain."

Q7: What is the purpose of approval gates in 
Production?
"Approval gates ensure that production deployment happens only after manual approval. Before approving, we verify test results, 
deployment logs, and release notes. This reduces the risk of deploying incorrect or unstable code to production."

Q8: How do you ensure safe production 
deployment?
"Before deployment, I make sure all unit tests, integration tests, and data quality checks have passed. I also validate the deployment in 
Dev and QA environments. If required, I keep a rollback plan ready in case any production issue occurs."

Q9: How do you monitor a pipeline after 
deployment?
"After deployment, I monitor CloudWatch logs, Glue job status, Airflow DAG runs, execution time, and failure alerts. I also compare 
source and target record counts to verify successful data processing. Any failures are immediately notified to the support team."

Q10: What are some common production issues in 
CI/CD?
"Common production issues include failed unit tests, missing Python packages, IAM permission errors, broken Airflow DAGs, schema 
mismatches, and incorrect environment variables. I troubleshoot these issues using pipeline logs, fix the root cause, and redeploy the 
application."

Q11: What is the role of Git in CI/CD?
"Git is used as the version control system to manage source code. Developers create feature branches, commit changes, and raise Pull 
Requests. Whenever code is merged into the main branch, the CI/CD pipeline is automatically triggered for testing and deployment."

Q12: How do you reduce deployment failures?
"I reduce deployment failures by using automated testing, code reviews, environment-specific configurations, and proper secret 
management. I also validate deployments in Dev and QA before moving them to Production. This ensures stable and reliable 
deployments."
